Models and Tables
=================

Use the ``db.Model`` class to define models, or the ``db.Table`` class to create tables.
Both handle Flask-SQLAlchemy's bind keys to associate with a specific engine.


Defining Models
---------------

See SQLAlchemy's `declarative documentation`_ for full information about defining model
classes declaratively.

.. _declarative documentation: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/orm/declarative_tables.html

Subclass ``db.Model`` to create a model class. This is a SQLAlchemy declarative base
class, it will take ``Column`` attributes and create a table. Unlike plain SQLAlchemy,
Flask-SQLAlchemy's model will automatically generate a table name if ``__tablename__``
is not set and a primary key column is defined.

.. code-block:: python

    import sqlalchemy as sa

    class User(db.Model):
        id = sa.Column(sa.Integer, primary_key=True)
        type = sa.Column(sa.String)

For convenience, the extension object provides access to names in the ``sqlalchemy`` and
``sqlalchemy.orm`` modules. So you can use ``db.Column`` instead of importing and using
``sqlalchemy.Column``, although the two are equivalent.

Defining a model does not create it in the database. Use :meth:`~.SQLAlchemy.create_all`
to create the models and tables after defining them. If you define models in submodules,
you must import them so that SQLAlchemy knows about them before calling ``create_all``.

.. code-block:: python

    with app.app_context():
        db.create_all()


Defining Tables
---------------

See SQLAlchemy's `table documentation`_ for full information about defining table
objects.

.. _table documentation: https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/core/metadata.html

Create instances of ``db.Table`` to define tables. The class takes a table name, then
any columns and other table parts such as columns and constraints. Unlike plain
SQLAlchemy, the ``metadata`` argument is not required. A metadata will be chosen based
on the ``bind_key`` argument, or the default will be used.

A common reason to create a table directly is when defining many to many relationships.
The association table doesn't need its own model class, as it will be accessed through
the relevant relationship attributes on the related models.

.. code-block:: python

    import sqlalchemy as sa

    user_book_m2m = db.Table(
        "user_book",
        sa.Column("user_id", sa.ForeignKey(User.id), primary_key=True),
        sa.Column("book_id", sa.ForeignKey(Book.id), primary_key=True),
    )


Reflecting Tables
-----------------

If you are connecting to a database that already has tables, SQLAlchemy can detect that
schema and create tables with columns automatically. This is called reflection. Those
tables can also be assigned to model classes with the ``__table__`` attribute instead of
defining the full model.

Call the :meth:`~.SQLAlchemy.reflect` method on the extension. It will reflect all the
tables for each bind key. Each metadata's ``table`` attribute will contain the detected
table objects.

.. code-block:: python

    with app.app_context():
        db.reflect()

    class User:
        __table__ = db.metadata["user"]

In most cases, it will be more maintainable to define the model classes yourself. You
only need to define the models and columns you will actually use, even if you're
connecting to a broader schema. IDEs will know the available attributes, and migration
tools like Alembic can detect changes and generate schema migrations.
